Changes in version 1.4.0 (2010-05-07)

New functions
    o	write.capthist() exports capthist object as DENSITY text files.
    o	read.capthist() imports capthist object from DENSITY text files.
    o	write.SPACECAP() exports capthist object and mask as SPACECAP
    text files.
    o	read.SPACECAP() imports capthist object and mask from SPACECAP
    text files.
    o	write.captures() has been renamed from write.capthist.
    o	closedN() computes various closed population estimators.
    o	closure.test() tests for population closure of Otis et al.
    (1978) and Stanley & Burnham (1999).
    o	MMDM() computes observed (trap-revealed) range length (Otis et
    al. 1978).
    o	ARL() computes asympototic range length (Jett & Nichols 1987).
    o	logmultinom() computes the multinomial coefficient of the SECR
    likelihood (internal function, now exported).

New datasets
    o	'skink' lizard pitfall trapping (Efford, Thomas & Spencer unpubl)
    o	'stoatDNA' stoat microsatellites (Efford, Borchers & Byrom 2009)
    o	'housemouse' Coulombe Mus musculus (Otis et al. 1978)
    o	'deermouse' Reid Peromyscus (Otis et al. 1978)

New features in old functions
    o	make.capthist() now sorts rows numerically if all values of
    animalID are valid numbers.
    o	make.capthist() now checks for missing values.
    o	make.capthist() places multi-session capture data in order by
    session before matching 'traps' objects.
    o	print.capthist() now sorts rows numerically if all values of
    animalID are valid numbers.
    o	make.grid() has a new option for labeling detectors "xy".
    o	secr.fit() has a new 'details' option to centre trap and mask
    coordinates; this can solve some numerical problems fitting
    coordinates with large absolute values.
    o	plot.mask() produces more attractive images and does not call
    image(), but is somewhat slower.
    o	read.mask() has been tweaked to allow import from csv format as
    used by SPACECAP.

Defunct
    o	read.captures() has been ditched - use read.table() instead.

Bugs fixed
    o	A bug in 'traps<-' has been fixed; replacement of traps for
    multiple sessions should now work.

Other
    o	Dataset 'secrdemo' now incorporates 'rawdata' and 'captdata'.
    o	Example text files 'capt.txt,'trap.txt','stoatcapt.txt',and
    'stoattrap.txt' are provided in the package installation folder
    'extdata' (e.g. setwd(system.file('extdata', package = 'secr'))).
    o	New vignette: secr-datainput.pdf
    o	Revised vignette: secr-overview.pdf


Changes in version 1.3.0 (2010-03-11)

New functions
    o	ellipse.secr() computes and plots confidence ellipses of
    fitted parameters.
    o	LLsurface.secr() plots log-likelihood surface of SECR model
    for 2 dimensions at a time.
    o	attenuationplot() plots the sound attenuation function from
    an acoustic SECR model.

New datasets
    o	ovensong - new acoustic dataset (Dawson & Efford J Appl Ecol;
    see also 'secr-sound.pdf')

New features in old functions
    o	The handling of structural relationships in secr.fit() with
    scaleg0 and scalesigma has been improved.
    o	The 'start' argument of secr.fit() may now be a previously
    fitted nested model.
    o	The default algorithm for initial values in secr.fit() now
    uses 'RPSV' instead of 'dbar' for spatial scale.
    o	secr.fit() has a new pre-defined covariate term T for time
    trend in detection parameter model formulae.

Other
    o	New detector types 'count', 'signal' ('polygon' and
    'transect' are present but should be treated as 'under
     development')
    o	New detection functions 'binary signal strength', 'signal
    strength', 'signal strength spherical'
    o	Finite mixture models for heterogeneity in detection
    parameters (use 'h2' in model formula)
    o	New vignettes: secr-overview.pdf, secr-sound.pdf,
    secr-finitemixtures.pdf

Version 1.2.11 2009-12-22

Bug fix for session names not in alphanumeric sequence

Version 1.2.10 2009-10-21

large models -- more robust memory allocation in external C code (malloc)
new example datasets -- 'possum' and 'ovenbird'
confint.secr -- improved profile likelihood confidence intervals, both beta and real parameters
secr.fit -- detects non-finite values of real parameters during maximization & terminates (cf stepmax in nlm)
sim.capthist -- time-varying detection parameters
sim.resight -- new function
secr.fit -- experimental and undocumented mark-resight

Version 1.2.9 2009-10-05

split.traps -- new method
print.traps -- now displays component name if list
secr.fit -- new argument details$minprob; new default 1e-50 may affect likelihood
print.capthist -- new argument 'condense' for condensed printing of proximity data
verify.mask -- fixed bug with mask lists
verify.capthist -- additional checks for missing or badly coded data

Version 1.2.8 2009-09-30 and later

Further changes to external C code for non-Windows platforms (now expected to work)
Minor editting of documentation files
Improved handling of multi-session capthist objects (2009 10 01)
Restore output of dAICc in AIC.secr (2009 10 02)

Version 1.2.7 2009-09-29

External C code re-written to conform to ISO C99 for use on non-Windows platforms
External C code now relies on R math functions dpois, dbinom
make.capthist -- new argument 'sortrows'
print.secr -- minor changes
secr.fit -- secr version number recorded in secr object
secr.fit -- optional check of input data with 'verify'
verify (new) -- function to check data in capthist objects
ip.secr (new) -- density estimated by simulation and inverse prediction
collate -- minor bug fixed
plot.secr -- confidence limits of detection function by delta method
vcov.secr -- new option for covariances between real parameters

Version 1.2.6 2009-09-10

Simulation functions (sim.popn, sim.capthist, simulate, sim.secr) use R random number generators and seeds.
New S3 method simulate.secr and function sim.secr for simulating from a fitted secr model
New S3 methods deviance and df.residual
secr.make.newdata is now exported (previously internal)
Additional components in secr object returned by secr.fit: design, D, start
Bugs fixed in secr.make.newdata, secr.fit and make.capthist

